Theme music plays
You’ve probably heard the adage that any chain is only as strong as its weakest link
and perhaps you even experienced this in technology
that no matter how robust and well-written your application,
if the systems upon which your applications are running are unreliable
or perhaps even deeper down the power, cooling, or the buildings hosting them are unreliable.
The full stacks simply doesn't work or doesn’t work properly.
Similarly deployments running on Kubernetes are no different.
They’re only as reliable as Kubernetes itself.
The same applies to the various components that make up Kubernetes.
We've talked about Masters, nodes, kube-api and the like.
These are some of the components that make up Kubernetes
and its external control plane.
Without them, or without them functioning properly, applications running on Kubernetes
simply won’t function; won't function properly or won't perform to the standards that we expect them to.
Just like any other software system, Kubernetes components can fail.
Either because the underlying hardware, network or software they are running upon
experiencing an issue or the process itself has some sort of fault or bug.
In order to create a system that is resilient in light of failure,
if any one component or depending on the configuration perhaps even multiple failures in multiple components.
Kubernetes is architected and provides facilities for redundancy,
replication and graceful handling the faults within its system.
These together are considered the high-availability portions of Kubernetes.
We will discuss a few aspects of this in this lecture
and we’ll look at actually implementing them in future lectures.
Keep in mind this is an area of increasing development and focus in Kubernetes.
It’s not 100% complete, but is quite mature.
The high-availability features are continually being added upon
but the core feature set is complete and focuses on replicating Kubernetes' key infrastructure components
to provide a scalable, resilient and robust system for almost any instances.
Kubernetes itself is comprised of many components
and many of them you don’t even need to know about, even if you were a Kubernetes system developer.
For the purposes of understanding high availability however,
let’s review a few of the key components that relate to creating highly available Kubernetes clusters.
First for the Kubernetes Master is a machine running three processes on a node on a cluster,
or at least three processes.
These processes are the Kube-apiserver,
the Kube-controller-manager and the Kube-scheduler.
Second etcd is a consistent and a highly available distribute key store
that stores all clustered data.
Etcd itself actually isn’t provided or even maintain the Kubernetes project.
It’s a separate data store,
a separate key value database
that Kubernetes uses to store its data because it has solved the problem of having a fast,
scalable, distributed data store and Kubernetes didn’t want to reinvent the wheel.
Much like WordPress uses MySQL as a database,
Kubernetes uses ETCD as a database for master data.
ETCD can run on its own machines or the master machines,
however, it’s important to run etcd on its own.
And it’s not recommended to run it on the same machines that run the Master.
Many things can go wrong on any system.
No system is completely infallible.
But the design of Kubernetes is laid out with the intention
to provide resiliency and redundancy at most points.
And it is continuing to evolve.
Currently highly available Masters in Kubernetes
are accomplished by four key things for the Master
and Kubernetes control plain sight of things.
And then ensuring we have multiple worker nodes as well.
We’ll walk through each step one through four
and in the later lecture, we'll use Kubernetes tooling
to set a highly available cluster
and then we’ll look at step 5 to set up multiple worker nodes as well.
But for now we’ll just discuss each step at a high level
to lay the foundation of understanding;
for demos and for lectures.
First creating reliable nodes that together can form a highly available Master implementation is where we  start.
These are the actual Linux machines upon which or Masters etcd will actually run.
Second we’ll set up a redundant, reliable storage layer
with a cluster etcd implementation.
Third we’ll start replicated load balanced API service.
Fourth we'll set up Master elected, kube-scheduler and kube-controller-manager demons.
Each of these steps sounds really daunting I’m sure
and probably has things you don’t understand.
We’ll go over each one of them in a moment
and what it means. And rest assured
that Kubernetes provides us with a set of tools called kops
K O P S.
That will provide a level of automation
in setting up and managing each one of these,
while you could manually go and create the configuration files needed for each one of these.
Kubernetes provides a suite of tools called kops
K O P S
what provides a higher-level command line interface
to a lot of the tasks required to write configuration files and maintain them.
This provides an interface, which reduces errors
and can make you more efficient and automated if you choose use them.
But understanding what steps the tools are taking
is an important part of learning.
So we’ll go over each one.
First let’s look up and setting up a reliable system.
Up to this point we’ve worked with a mini-kube
where the master processes and node workers all work on the same machine.
If that machine lost power, restarts or is thrown out of a window and went into a pool
everything fails.
In simple Kubernetes clusters
while there is a Master and some nodes.
If the Master fails e.g. the data center it’s in goes down or it loses power or connectivity,
the cluster will cease to function no matter how many workers nodes there are.
In highly available systems
depending the number of Masters.
Even if individual Masters and machines running those Masters fail
other Masters can take over and provide the services of processes running on the Master.
One can build highly available systems with any degree of resiliency,
depending on how many master and instances of etcd are created
a certain number of failures can be tolerated.
For example ensuring these systems are as physically separated and independent as possible is important.
It is of little use if all of these machines are flooded and the same storm,
are burned the same fire, or lose connectivity because of the same fiber cut
in a fiber optic line leaving town.
Understanding what the variety of failures can be
and choosing which ones you'd like to design and hedge against.
Is important in understanding what architecture you should create.
In this diagram we can see the variety of facilities available to us
in creating a redundant system.
Multiple worker nodes and multiple Master notes which live behind the load balancer
are what creates a variety of the high availability systems in Kubernetes.
You can create multiple Master nodes in different parts of the country
so that if an Internet line is cut or fiber optic line is compromised
and a given city might have connectivity issues,
only the Master in that city is affected
and other Masters in other parts of country might be able to take over.
Similarly a natural disaster in one area that knock a data center off-line
doesn’t have to affect your worker nodes or your client applications
because the load balancer detects that Master node being gone and begins to send requests to other ones.
Let's look at how that is created.
Remember the four steps.
The first being reliable nodes for our Masters.
Each machine should be separated and single points of failure removed as much as is reasonable for your needs.
You may not need to have Masters located
in every major metro area in every country where you want run your application
or you may decide that that’s important.
That’s a choice that you have to make based on the needs of your application or your business.
This will vary based on the amount of redundancy you really need or are trying to accomplish.
For example it may be okay for you to have each machine in the same city,
if surviving a catastrophe that isolates your entire city isn’t important or considered so low probability,
it isn’t worth protecting against.
Remember everything we do when it relates to machines and technology might have a cost associated with operating it.
Running 10 Masters usually cost 10 times as much is running one
and distributing them across multiple geographic data centers
usually incurs some sort cost to begin with for them all to communicate.
Understanding your needs and aiding yourself against complexity and cost
is an important exercise of design in architecture of high availability.
For now just know that creating reliable nodes is an important basis point for everything we’ll do here on out.
Secondly we need to create a reliable data storage layer.
ETCD is a system that is a study in and of itself,
it something built entirely separate from Kubernetes and maintained separately.
Kubernetes uses it much like WordPress uses MySQL
as a data store that is built and managed by an entirely development organization.
Etcd itself has redundancy options
well beyond defaults that are typically used by the Kubernetes deployment tools what we’ll use.
If you need this explore the etcd documentation
or consult an etcd expert on how to further tune your etcd deployment
that is created for you by the Kubernetes tools.
It’s completely outside the scope of Kubernetes
as it is a different software system
and could be an area that is providing months or months of work and study on its own.
Examine these options if you need them
but for most applications you won't.
The next step is having replicated API servers.
Kubernetes API is a key process in a Master
and as such should run on all Masters.
Since clients need access to the Kube-api processes
for example Kubectl command line tool that you've been using to access information about your cluster.
Modify deployments, create deployment accesses is the Kube-API process on the Master.
A load balancer in front of the machines that are making up the Masters is critical
to ensure this process is exposed properly and a request from applications like Kubectl
are routed to an available Master.
Setting up a load balancer is very easy.
It exists outside the scope of Kubernetes
and Kubernetes doesn’t provide a load balancer facility
in and of itself although it does provide facilities for managing them.
We'll use a load balancer provided by Amazon web services
called elastic load balancer service.
In further lectures to create replicated API servers.
This varies depending on where your chosen deployment is.
Next and finally we will need to make sure the Master is what you set up
can speak to one another and elect who is going to be the active Master.
Now the items are actually set up and alive on the nodes,
we have the pieces in place but they actually aren't running.
We need to ensure that only one actor works the data at a given time.
This is the too many cooks in the kitchen
who aren't talking to each other problem you might have.
If you for example were trying to cook a meal with multiple cooks
there have to be some level coordination between who’s doing want.
Each Scheduler and Controller Manager will be started with a  --leader-elect flag
that will use something called a lease-lock API
between themselves to ensure only one instance of each is running or active at a given time.
In plain terms that means the Masters which are up and running and healthy
will communicate with each other and decide who is going to speak for the cluster.
They'll use a specific algorithm
and a specific protocol to do it amongst each other
and when one goes away the process will be repeated.
There are specific documentation available on how this works and the details of the process,
if you’d like to understand more about it, consult with Kubernetes design documentation
available in the Kubernetes Github repository.
For now and for most purposes simply understand
that there is some level of communication between the Masters, which is handled through etcd.
All this comes together to create a robust high available architecture
to ensure that we have multiple worker nodes in a variety of availability zones
to create a system that can withstand the kind of failures that you decide
might disrupt your application.
In further lectures we'll go through the process of setting these up.
For now even if you don’t understand the exact details of how this happens
and it is not expected that you should.
Understand and be comfortable with what happens in this diagram
when one Master might go away.
For example if Master node number one
were to experience failure the load balancer
would take any incoming request from worker nodes
or Kubectl and route it to a Master
which is actually working using standard load balancer functions.
When that Master comes back up
the load balancer might begin sending it requests
if it is chosen as the active Master.
Understanding what happens and how multiple Masters work together
and what happens on a Master is important.
How each of these happen
and individual details of the processes are less important
although we'll go into them through further lectures.
For now just think about how this diagram works
when multiple Masters exist
and what happens when a Master might go down.